Runners who only run are hurt a lot and
it's usually due to emotion imbalance so
I always do this test to show them
whether your butt muscles are strong
enough to keep your pelvis straight and
whether you're strong enough to keep
your knee from falling into this
position I look like I'm drunk or
something how are you doing this with
your heels on Dr vond Wright is a
leading orthopedic surgeon and Longevity
expert leveraging her expertise with
Elite athletes to revolutionize the way
we move eat and train to live longer
stronger and better I'm on a rampage to
make bones sexy again because in the
United States at least 50% of women will
get osteoporosis along with 2 million
men now osteoporosis is low bone density
and studies show that people with low
bone density have higher cognitive
decline it increases your risk of
fracture if you break your hip 50% of
the time whether you're a man or a woman
you will not return to preall function
and 30% of the time you will die and
there's a lot that causes bone fragility
such as aging not building enough bone
in our youth it's our sedentary
Lifestyles the myth that women have to
be teeny tiny and it's even things like
a woman breastfeeding will lose 20% of
her bone density in the first 6 months
but it's not inevitable and I will lay
out a lifestyle that I call unbreakable
it's about muscle bone nutrition but the
most important part is mindset I'm very
very excited uh just to pause that is
there a link between menopause and brain
density yes and it's because of the
plummeting of estrogen which is critical
for muscle bone tendon ligament fat and
without it it can have dire effects so
you need to know the following
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
[Music]
Dr vonder Wright yes for anyone that's
unaware of what you do and who you do it
for what do you do and who do you do it
for so you know in as a sports doctor
over the years we've learned how to take
really high- performing athletes you
know those are who are winning all the
time who need to continually get better
and better and better at their craft and
over the 30 years of my career we've
gone from really focusing on how they
train the periodization of their
training to the last time I uh was at
the University of Pittsburgh I was the
medical director of the UPMC Lemieux
sports complex which is where the
Pittsburgh Penguins are housed and it
had gotten so uh scientific they had a
full-time Chef every meal from breakfast
lunch dinner every meal on the planes
were prepared because when it comes down
to split-second agility
top of brain thinking every little bit
counts and so in the 30 years of my of
my medical career it's gone from just
learning more about performance science
of how to train to how to feed people to
how to recover people so instead of
doing for instance I think Dara Torres
was talking about her uh Olympic runs in
her 40s right she trained much
differently when she was 24 and in her
40s after she had had a child it was
much more about recovery not as much
hours in a pool so I take all those
things that we've learned over this
course of my career and now apply them
not only to athletes but to people like
you and me who were in high performance
jobs I need to be tip toop in every
sphere of my life as you do and how do
we eat better recover better take the
principles of performance that we've
learned from athletes into high
performers and even mere mortal athletes
like me I love of my work involves like
cognitive performance making sure my
brain is sharp when it needs to be yes
how much of your work crosses over into
the cognitive realm you know I am not a
brain scientist myself but I am
fortunate to be surrounded by people who
are expert in that so from my own
perspective I've come to appreciate at a
much deeper level personally um as well
as professionally the role of sleep in
fact we've talked about my previous
books from the early 2000s before and
when I wrote those books Mobility was
King I wrote only about mobility and
then as I progressed in my career I got
deeper deeper deeper into nutrition and
then I would say okay nutrition is
number one and Mobility is second but at
this phase of evolution of sleep science
and knowing how restoring the brain and
providing adequate time and nutrients I
put sleep first sleep and Recovery first
because you can't do any of these other
things without a r well recovered brain
in fact somebody asked me the other day
about timing of working out and is it
always necessary to do it in the morning
like that's the Mantra get up go do your
workout and my answer to that was you
have to know how your brain works for
instance my brain is best between 5:00
a.m. and 2: p.m. that is when I'm going
to get all my deep work done I'm going
to be creative I'm going to think after
2 p.m. I could build you a house I can
continue operating but if I'm going to
write a book it's going to be early so I
do not work out in the morning because
I'm not going to waste that brain
energy on physical activity when I need
it for this deep work so that's the way
I apply brain science but I I'm so lucky
to be surrounded in in the place I am
now with people who put eegs on your
head and map your brain and tell you
which brain Pathways you're too
stressful on and and which brain
Pathways we can train and you can train
the physical brain like a muscle you can
train the physical brain like a muscle
yeah so there's this company called
nestry that I just happen to have access
to and they put EEG helmets on my
Precision longevity clients and we map
their brains and look at for instance
here's an example things that are
habitual take very little brain injury
uh energy even if we need a lot of brain
energy they become so habitual our brain
turns away uh energy from them versus
things we're learning or things we're
stressed about we devote so much energy
to that so once they this company Maps
our brains then they have this training
program where it's almost like getting
your your cognitive brain out of the way
and let your subconscious brain reapply
energy to the pathways that you actually
need that you you've begun to to ignore
and it makes you more efficient and I'm
being an adequate in explaining it but
brain scientists believe that you can
retrain the brain like a muscle and
devote energy to neurop Pathways so I
know we do this to athletes to try to
squeeze performance out of them when you
use that term Precision longevity what
does that mean so you know after the
understanding of human DNA knowing what
we're truly made
of it pushed us out of a time in
medicine
where we've been for the last 150 years
which is
Observe and one size fits nobody now
that we've sequenced the human genome we
can develop Health Plans your health
plan my health plan it's not generic
here's an example when I have people who
want to talk to me about living
healthier longer and we and we draw a
set of biomarkers it's not 6,000
biomarkers it's just a set of about 23
that are Beyond regular labs and I see
that for instance maybe stevenh you have
a high load of senescent cells well I'm
going to specifically design your Gap
nutrition according to what you need you
might not need anything for inflammation
because maybe your inflammation labs are
good but historically what we would have
done is say okay let's just give
everybody the same formula but now we
are able to devise what your body needs
at your time I do the same thing with
exercise I never say let's have you do
150 minutes of moderate exercise because
I have access to lactate threshold
testing where you're walking on a
treadmill running on a treadmill or on a
bike every four minutes we're pricking
your finger and I can tell exactly what
when your mitochondria the little energy
storehouses in your cells go from
burning fat to burning Caro
carbohydrates and that place is called
the fat Max and that is when your
mitochondria your energy organel are
most efficient and that's where we want
to work out 80% of the time so that's
just an example of how I'm going to tell
you what heart rate you need to work out
in I'm going to tell you how to get fill
the gaps in your nutrition instead of
just doing broad guidelines because
that's the state-of-the-art right
now when you think about personalization
I was thinking also not just about the
individual but different phases of life
and how maybe in my my 20s there's a
certain set of things I need to be
thinking about more so than in my 30s my
40s and my 50s and my 60s is that a
useful way to think about it are there
different things we need to be thinking
about in different seasons of our life
or is it the same things in every
season well I love that question and the
one one word answer is yes every season
of our life is different let's take
bones for
instance we build build build build
bones yeah until in women we're about 28
and uh men 30 we reach Peak bone mass we
then reach a plateau where we keep our
bone density and then in women it begins
to plummet due to hormonal influences
for men men usually maintain their bone
density until their 70s when they
plummet unless they have a metabolic
problem an autoimmune disease or having
had the need to take a lot of steroids
and then you see a big difference at 50
so in Bones that's a good example how
every few decades our bones are reacting
differently muscle is the same way we
know that we can gain muscle at any time
in our lives but we do it most easily
until we're about 30
right we also know of uh changes in the
way our gut functions as we age having
to do with absorption and the uh the
ability of the microvilli in our gut to
absorb nutrients and different kinds of
nutrients women in midlife for instance
need vitamins that are something called
methylated which means broken down a
little more because our gut function is
less efficient so every phase of our
aging were different well on that point
of bones that that sounded like you were
saying men's bones maintain their
density longer and women don't why why
is that and is that linked to menopause
well men uh because of the influence of
testosterone and the genetics of having
um XY chromosomes build more bone
initially thicker cortices more more
absolute poundage of Bones and so um and
then because of the plummeting of
estrogen which is critical for bone
health women lose bone faster than men
such that after about age of 40 when we
get to that Plateau women start to lose
bone density about 20% by the time they
get to their menop pause and um that can
have dire effects for women but that is
all due to the role of estrogen on
controlling bone density so is this
inevitable is the loss of bone density
inevitable for women it is not in um in
2004 we studied a very large group of
Masters athletes meaning athletes uh 40
and older in the National senior games
which is Olympics for uh people of that
age demographic and the National games
you have to have won your State Games to
qualify so these were pretty highlevel
recreational athletes so we did a study
looking at their bone density across
time and the first thing the first study
we found was that with chronic exercise
such as these people did you can
maintain your bone density at a very
high proportion into your 80s the second
question we asked was okay if we know we
can do that what exercise is really
important for that and so we divided
Sports up into uh bounding Sports where
the bones were being impacted like like
basketball running um volleyball
anything when you come down hard on your
bones versus swimming bowling the less
biking and we found that bashing your
bones impact was as important in
maintaining bone density as things you
can't control like your age whether
you're born with XX chromosomes or XY
chromosomes family history so impacting
bones causing them to build up over time
is critically important for maintaining
bone density so to answer your question
is loss of bone density inevitable loss
of estrogen is inevitable loss of bone
density doesn't have to result in
osteoporosis fracture and
Frailty so I want to get into why that's
happening but just to pause there
because a lot of people don't think
bones are that important oh like I think
a lot of people see our bones as just
some thing that yeah we can't influence
you don't think of them like muscles
muscles I go to the gym I can expand my
muscles I can get strong but with bones
it feels like they're static you know so
how how would you refute that so that I
start caring about my bones and what is
the cost if I don't care about my bones
well you know what I'm on a rampage for
this year that to bring to make bones
sexy again CU here from a very
superficial level is why we should care
and then I'll tell you from a more
scientific level
you know we only think of our bones
usually in a couple times like you look
in the mirror and somebody tells you oh
your bone structure is magnificent look
at this model's bones and or uh and
we're all touching our cheekbones or we
think about them when we hear about a
great archaeologist who's just
discovered a new people group and we can
tell from our bones how they lived how
they died how healthy they were in fact
in that setting bone is the last remnant
of your whole life it endures the
longest I mean the hisory the history
you talk about in your bones outlives
anything muscle goes away skin goes away
everything except your bones which
remain that's fascinating right
but the other reason we even think about
our bones is when they break right when
they bones people think bones are silent
like a strong silent type just hanging
back
until they break and then they're
screaming at you right and and causing
Frailty and here's some bone stats
because the real answer to the question
is coming one in two women will have an
osteoporotic fracture in her lifetime so
it's either me or your partner or me or
your assistant right one in two will
have an osteoporotic fracture women have
70% of all hip fractures hip fractures
are one of the main contributors to
ending up in a nursing home because you
can no long walk and take care of
yourself right 70% are women if you
break your hip 50% of the time whether
you're a man or a woman you will not
return to preall function you cannot go
live in that house where you raised your
children you may not be able to drive
and go be totally independent right and
30% of the time it's a huge number 30%
of the time you will die either from the
complications of the fracture from the
bed rest from the in infections you get
the bladder infections just the sequele
of being that sedentary so those are
those are not meant to scare people that
is the reality that I see every day as
an orthopedic surgeon on
call but there are other reasons to
carry about the bones because fracture
is a big one
bones and it makes sense nature is so
conservative bones are in our body from
the top of our head to our pinky toe
right bones are master
communicators we think of muscle which
we're all talking about now and Bone and
adapost and everything as as siloed
organs that don't have much to do with
each other except they live next to each
other the fact of the matter is for
instance when we're talking about the
musculoskeletal system bone tendon
ligament muscle fat cartilage muscle
stem cells there are all all derived
from the same stem cell the mesenchimal
stem cell so they're not distant
neighbors they're
cousins and they all speak in the same
language they may have different
dialects I was thinking about an example
of of this you know how in the UK
English is the language but depending on
what parish you live in or which country
within the UK English sounds very
different but it's the same language So
within musculoskeletal tissue isue
muscle and bone are not separate they
are one ecosystem such
that when muscle releases a protein
called irisin it talks to the Bone when
bone releases a protein called
osteocalcin it talks to the muscle but
in the case of
bone osteocal if we just stick with that
protein it talks to the whole body when
your osteoblast s the bone building
cells in your bones released osteocalcin
it goes to your brain and has a
neuroprotective effect by decreasing
inflammation it goes to your brain and
causes the synthesis of neurons in the
hippocampus it goes to the pancreas and
helps with insulin insensitivity it goes
to the muscle and helps the muscles
scoop up glucose out of the blood right
if you're a man osteocal can travel to
the testes and that organ the litig
cells under stimulation of osteocalcin
will produce testosterone so it's like a
miracle and a wonder that we just think
of Bones as the strong silent type that
hold up our
muscle because actually bone and and the
proteins that it produces are Master
communicators and it makes so much sense
because we have bone everywhere in our
bodies why wouldn't our body bodies use
it like that I thought it was just a
frame well and it is a frame right
what's Muscle without bone just a heap a
metabolic tissue right it makes us gives
us our statue but it's a master
Communicator the framework is almost a
secondary job in my opinion the bone is
releasing stuff I got this
um
this little analogy I'm going to put on
the table in one of the one of the tubs
I've got some mineral some and then this
is the body yeah so could you explain to
me how the the bone is releasing
something into the body so we've talked
about the bone being structural right it
holds you up it gives you your stature
we've talked about bone being a master
Communicator another job of the bone is
as your body's
Storehouse to really really important
maybe if we just talk about one of them
calcium calcium is is a critical mineral
in our body we need it for muscle
contraction for pushing um molecules
across cell
membranes but we've got to store it
somewhere so when we eat food our body
pull our intestines pull it out of the
food we eat and stores it in our bones
and so our body is always sensing how
much calcium how much phosphorus do we
have what do we need when our body
senses that we need more it goes to the
Bone it tickles the osteoclastic and say
osteoclast we need some more calcium the
osteoclast breaks down some bone
releases calcium and it goes into the
body for
use and then the body has enough to use
the body does not just keep piling it in
because
hypercalcemia causes heart arhythmia
it's bad right the body is perfectly in
homeostasis in Balance so when the bone
has released enough it sits back and
keeps storing it right
the calcium your body doesn't need if
the bone is
full it's excreted through the kidneys
and this is a really fine balance
between building bone releasing the
storehouse of minerals into the
bloodstream or saying oh we've got
enough let's send it out in our urine
the body is such a miracle like that so
if I don't have enough calcium or some
of these other minerals does that mean
that my bones are going to become
fragile
so you know there are lots of things
that go into bone fragility or
osteopenia and one of them is not laying
down enough bone in our youth if we T
you asked me earlier about changes
across a lifespan when it comes to Bone
what's interesting is that I get very
very young women in my clinic for 25 28
whom for various reasons I do a bone
density test on and they are already
have brittle bone
I know it's it's it's shocking well I
think that happens for a number of
reasons number one we didn't build
enough bone there is still a myth in
this country that women have to be teeny
tiny that we have to starve ourselves
and when that happens many women do not
have consistent menstrual cycles and
estrogen which then helps us lay down
bone so that's number one we don't
estrogen plays a role in laying down but
yes it does critical role so we're not
laying down enough or maybe
we're athletes we're in we Title 9 which
is the law that um equalize sport for
women in college is 53 years old so
maybe young women are not laying down
enough bone because they're expending so
much energy 10,000 calories a day and
then they're not refeeding in the way so
they're always living in a state of
energy
deficit and not laying down enough bone
or maybe young women are coming to my
office with not enough bone because we
are raising an entire generation of
sedentary children who are sitting
around in their basements on playing
games building brains but not building
bodies that is borne out by looking out
of the University of Wisconsin
Orthopedic researchers there studied
which women's
sports build the best bone and it's
gymnastics it is the pounding and the
feeding of those athletes that builds
the best best bone so we have trouble
with not enough brittle bones in
adolescence because we're not building
it the second place in the lifespan that
we may become low in bone density and
hear me people I am not saying not to
breastfeed I mean I in my children I my
child I breastfed for a year it's really
great for
babies
but a woman breastfeeding will lose 20%
of her bone density in the first 6
months of breastfeeding and if she's not
really careful to get 500 milligrams of
calcium a day in her food or through
supplementation she will not build it
back and then if you have children in
ear in succession because many women are
waiting until 30s to have their first
child and then have less time we may
never build backbone so that's another
key point that people don't realize
could be dangerous to the bones and then
finally yes is this period about around
per menopause starting around 45 when
estrogen levels become very chaotic and
then ultimately zero that can cause the
rapid decline in bone density and Bone
weakness that you're actually asking me
about and that's because estrogen is
critical for controlling the absorption
this part the
absorption of bone and without estrogen
controlling the absorption it just keeps
breaking down bone faster than the
osteoblast the building cells can build
it so there's an an unbalance a
disregulation so I want to go into all
of that starting with the point you made
about um having doing Impact Sports when
we're younger yeah because like people
often say if you do Impact Sports when
you're younger especially some of them
there's other consequences like injury
or hitting your head so you're saying
that we should be running or jumping
when we're younger to build our our bone
strength absolutely to build everything
oh it's you know we we uh make
mitochondria most the energy of
ourselves we make a lot of mitochondria
in our youth if we're not active in our
youth we don't have the anabolic
stimulus as much to make as much
mitochondria if we are sedentary
children we will make bone but we will
not build bone to the extent we do if
we're bashing it every day and I and I
think the data out of Wisconsin is a
good illustration of that and is in all
seasons of life if I'm 60 years old
should I still be bashing that bone
playing basketball abs and that's what
my study from the national senior game
shows that by impacting your bones
across your lifespan you can change your
bone density so on that point of
pregnancy which was your second point
there during my pregnancy after my
pregnancy what do I need to be doing is
it drinking milk yeah so if and this is
the data I gave you was specifically for
breastfeeding okay so for breastfeeding
mothers uh you will lose about 500
milligrams of calcium a day as you're
making milk for your child you must
replace that I like people to replace
their calcium with whole food right with
prunes and dates and and high calcium um
Dairy if you will if you simply cannot
do that okay take a supplement but if
you forget to do that I mean I get it I
was a young mother I'm exhausted I
wasn't a young mother I was a
40-year-old mother
exhausted you have to be so mindful as
your the baby's latching on to eat some
calcium eat your yogurt eat your calcium
chew from Whole Foods if you will so
that you rebuild your bone which you're
completely capable of doing studies show
you will rebuild your bone but not if
you're not aware not if you're in the
I've got to lose the baby fat starving
phase let's not do that you talked to
about how bone has an impact on various
parts of the body and I've had you talk
about this phrase the bone brain axis
yeah what is the bone brain AIS well if
we just talk about um just choose one of
the the proteins that bone makes
osteocalcin so as that's released into
the bloodstream one of the places it
goes is into it through into the brain
and it can cause it can Aid in the
neuroprotective effects so what is that
mean under normal metabolism we um
develop free radical
through du due to normal metabolism cell
work um we develop oxidative stress and
osteocalcin works to decrease that
oxidative damage to repair cells in the
brain so that's number one number two it
stimulates the release of something
called brain derived neurotropic protein
bdnf factor which stimulates the growth
of neurons in a part of the brain called
the hippocampus which is involved in
memory and here's here's the opposite
side of it we know in people that have
low bone density they also have higher
brain cognitive dysfunction with age and
vice versa there's an association in the
literature with osteoprosis and
cognitive decline and vice versa I heard
you in the The Business Insider
interview do describe there being a
critical decade yes for bone health mhm
what is the critical decade I think the
critical decade for most of our health
Stephen is no later than 35 to 45 for
men and women that's because um we know
for
women that's when estrogen starts to
decline or become chaotic so when we're
in our 30s to 40s that is the time to
get all of our health habits together
it's time to get a physical to see what
your Baseline labs are I think it would
be critical for men and women
particularly men to get a baseline
testosterone so that in the future when
we're thinking about supplementing
testosterone we're supplementing back to
your particular level because in the
future let's say when you're 50 a man's
testosterone could be 600 which Falls
within the normal range but if he's
still feeling low energy not himself a
lot of tendon and ligus injuries well
his young testosterone might have been
800 or a th000 so I like people to get
baseline lab if they've never been to
the doctor before uh around 35 all
things so that we know what we're
returning you to number one number two
if you have been so busy with your
career and stepped away from any
semblance of mobility and resistance
training now is the time because had I
known then what I know now when I was 40
I was training for triathlons I was an
aerobic athlete right I ran I biked but
what I would have done then if with what
I know now is I would have been lifting
a lot of weight to build maximum muscle
while I still had the most hormones to
start at a better place because you can
build muscle but it's better to start
from a higher average so get some Labs
make a relationship with the
doctor get all your preventive screening
do not uh blow that off um develop the
habits that are going to carry you
through a lifetime whether it's smart
anti- inflammatory nutrition whether
it's getting into a resistance training
program building up your cardiac
machine I saw that you were running a
lot now and we want the highest possible
V2 Max that we can as we enter into
midlife because we never want as we age
to cross something called the fragility
line so V2
Max is the measure of it's the ultimate
measure of fit
how much oxygen you are capable of
pulling out of the air and diffusing
across your lungs into your
blood world class athletes I was just at
the US uh Olympic Center in Park City
Utah those athletes have a V2 Max of 75
80 sometimes 90 right mere mortals are
considered excellent when they have a V2
Max uh of around 50 for women around
50 so you can build V2 to Max and should
in the critical decade because once we
hit midlife we will decline 10% a decade
if we don't consistently build it up so
what does that look like so if I started
at 50 50 years old my last V2 Max was
when I was at when I was 50 and it was
50 it was pretty good because I was an
endurance person right just in whole
numbers by the time I turn 60 it's going
to be 45 70 40 80 35 I never ever ever
want to hit 18 if I'm a man or 16 if I'm
a woman because that is the level of V2
Max when we can't get up from a chair by
ourselves we when we can't walk across
the room because that takes cardiac
function and so the higher we get our V2
Max in our youth the more Runway we have
even if we don't continue to build it up
yeah I've got a family member that can't
walk upstairs without being out of
breath and it's so debilitating because
when you have grandkids and the
grandkids start running around and you
want to play with them it's so sad
watching this particular family
member see the grandkids come the
grandkids say let's play the grandkids
run off and this person can't go after
them so they just have to watch they
literally watch the the grandkids
playing in the garden because they can't
play with them and I think it's s such a
sad thing it's one of my big motivators
to try try and stay healthy is just to
be able to extend my health span that's
right so that I can be healthier
hopefully until the day that I die thatd
be great but would I want to talk about
running I want to talk about V2 Max to
close off on the subject of Bones
there's two terms that I that I want to
hear one is this term osteoporosis yes
now I have no idea what osteoporosis is
I've heard it a couple of times in my
life but I don't know if it's something
I should be thinking about worried about
um or what it means yes osteoporosis is
the word we use to describe low bone
density Okay so so the way we measure
osteoporosis is uh using an x-ray called
a DEA scan a dual X-ray and it just
measures it Compares your bone density
to that of a 30-year-old healthy person
and it gives us something called a
t-core so it's it's like when you're in
school and you're graded on a bell curve
and the center of the curve is average
and that's the average for a
30-year-old when you get a dexa scan
score and it's positive fan fantastic
you have bones of a
30-year-old if you get a t-core on a
dexas scan that's from 0 to
minus1 it's okay minus one is the
definition of osteopenia meaning watch
out your bones are getting weak the
definition of osteoporosis is minus a
t-core of minus
2.5 increases your risk of fracture by
40% or more all the bad statistics that
I talked to you about come with
osteoporosis and how many people have
osteopenia osteoporosis in over the age
of 50 in America well two million men
have osteoporosis interestingly isn't
that interesting you don't think about
it as a men's disease and uh one in two
women will have an osteoporotic fracture
so at least 50% of women but it's not
inevitable that's why I'm so interested
in in Catching people early in the
critical decade it's not inevitable but
it will be inevitable if we don't catch
it but here's the thing that's
bothersome in the United States and in
many other countries uh with people I
deal with you cannot get a dexa scan
paid for until you're
65 by 65 the damage is done why are we
waiting even with people who have had a
fracture there's a gap in followup such
that they should all have a dexa scan
because the number one thing that
predicts future fracture is past
fracture
so Public Service Announcement if you've
had a fracture get a dexa scan even if
it was a traumatic one like you had b a
car accident but definitely if you have
fallen if your dog pulled you down if it
was a low trauma fracture get a dexa
scan because then at least you'll know
where you are and can then plan a course
for building your bone are there any
early warning signs that I might be
suffering from osteoporosis or on my way
to
osteoporosis you know I think you can
get Clues from your own family okay if
your mother
shrank if you if you used to be able to
look your mother in the eye like me my
mother looked me in the i54 and now
she's way down here we lose height in
both men and women due to uh compression
of her spine vertebrae we lose height so
if your dad shrank if your mother shrank
that's a good indication that you have a
family history where osteoporosis can
exist or if your mother had a hip
fracture or or if for some reason maybe
asthma you've had to be on uh high dose
steroids your whole life or an
autoimmune that's very bad for bones so
from a medical standpoint from a family
history standpoint from a personal
standpoint usually fracture what about
if I'm a smoker does that have an impact
on my bone health and chances yeah I'm
really glad you asked that smoking is a
poison to Bone healing whether it is
fracture will heal more slowly in fact
we have a very a much higher rate of
non-union which is where we fix a
fracture and it still doesn't heal in
smokers we know that uh there is a big
body of data within the orthopedic
literature for people who have spine
surgery who are smokers they are not
only less healing but they're more
infected so the the noxious chemicals in
smoking are very bad for
bone good thing I don't smoke is that
smoking vaping or is it it's all vaping
might be more dangerous we just don't
have as much literature
okay and the the last thing before we
talk about running in fe2 Max and
endurance and sports and all those
things is the link between Alzheimer's
in bone health is there a link that goes
back to what we were talking about
before and there's a
correlation we I don't believe we worked
out the causation but there's a
correlation we see people with
Alzheimer and people with uh dangerous
osteoporosis are sometimes the same same
group 30% of the time people with brain
disease also of osteoporosis and it may
do be due to this uh connection that
we've talked about uh between the two
organ systems you had an aunt that
passed away from Alzheimer's I do my
aunt Ida she was brilliant she was a
teacher and she stopped remembering she
didn't remember herself she didn't
remember the farm that we were all
raised on that's a really hard thing to
witness um sometimes people with
Alzheimer's
lose the inhibition and they become
angry and enraged and afraid she never
did that but um but that's a hard thing
to witness how how did that experience
change you or change your focus or add
to the sort of what reservoir of
thoughts concerns reference points in
your life well you know what it has done
it has put an urgency and even it still
is a day-to-day battle I don't want I
think sometimes think people think for
me personally that because I talk about
these things all the time and I do lift
heavy and I do the thing I live the life
I prescribe for people that it's easy
and it's not easy you know I just I told
you IID finished this book I was writing
and there was a big gap in the
consistency of this lifestyle but what
motivates me to get back is the question
of what would it be like to live without
a brain that's
preserved I mean I don't know sometimes
I think about if I was aging and I had
to choose one would I choose an able
body or an able brain isn't that hard I
don't know that you do have to choose
but I can't fathom what life would be
like without an able brain and so for me
that motivates me to lift to make my
skeletal muscle secrete the uh proteins
that go to the brain and build better
brain to eat the foods that are not
going to clog my arteries it's just as a
motivator because I want to be this way
until I die
mhm what would you choose if you had to
an able body or an able brain my it was
super clear for me I'd rather have the
able brain me too me too relationships
that is that is the fullness of
Life protect but these things are also
fundamentally interconnected aren't they
that's why when I look at the alimer
stats around bone health I think well if
you were had osteoporosis or something
and you weren't moving as much maybe
yeah maybe you know what a huge
motivator for my patience is now that
you've brought this up
is Alzheimer's disease is thought of as
the third phase of diabetes right and so
everybody is aware of diabetes and it
means you don't process sugar and you
have glucose intolerance and your
pancreas is no longer functioning and
and the bad sequella that can come with
that what people are not aware of as
much at least as a people who come to my
clinic is pre-diabetes and if you don't
mind me diverging a little bit because
it's so important to disc question you
just asked me and can we prevent it and
and if we got to choose what would we
choose but I have people coming into my
office all the time and I look at their
labs and they have a fasting glucose
they've had their Labs drawn they've
done what we've said get in front of
your critical decade they've had their
fasting glucose drawn and it's
110 which is I'm going to tell you and
and their hemoglobin A1c is nearing six
so fasting glucose is the glucose that
remains in your blood after you haven't
eaten for 12 hours in a normally
functioning pancreas metabolic system we
want our fasting glucose to be around
85 right that's normal means we eat
something insulin comes out of our
pancreas the sugar is put into our
muscle and then the blood sugar is
around 85 if it's staying up 110
consistantly we know from the
literature that you have a 70 to 100%
chance of developing full-blown diabetes
within 10 years but what I see in people
coming into my office is I'll say did
anybody ever tell you you were
pre-diabetic and either the answer is no
or the answer is oh yeah somebody told
me they said just make a few you know
focus more on your exercise and and what
I think the reaction to pre the
diagnosis of pre-diabetes should be is
running and screaming to get healthy
because if we know that with a
consistent blood sugar in the
pre-diabetic range and we're casually
told by our healthare provider oh just
go try to exercise more you know just
casually approach this don't eat so many
carbs that is not serious enough because
we know from a preventative standpoint
from a Precision longevity standpoint
which is all about prevention we can
prevent you from getting to diabetes in
the next 10 years if we're really really
serious about lifting weights about
cardio Health about anti-inflammatory
nutrition following so I don't view
pre-diabetes as a casual thing at all
because if in a 10 years you're going to
get diabetes and in 10 more years you're
going to have Alzheimer's disease and I
could have prevented that by paying
attention when I was
40 it's almost inexcusable that we're
not paying more attention to it 96
million people in the United States have
pre-diabetes
96 million 96 million according to the
American Diabetes Association I just
gave a talk at their annual
convention 96 million have a
preventable
characteristic that we can prevent them
from becoming diabetic and getting
Alzheimer disease and yet it is too
casually spoken
of that's like almost one in three that
means that there's three of us in this
room so Jack's
got pre pre-diabetes perhaps potentially
you're an you an an urance athlete
wouldn't you say I was an endurance
athlete and I'm I've been I don't have
it today it ran out but I'm a little
obsessed with continuous glucose
monitoring so I've been wearing it for
about 18 months and and uh it's so
interesting I told you that you know I
just finished this book and I've gotten
a little bit off my regular intensity
and it changes my blood sugar so I run a
little I because I haven't been lifting
four times a week only twice a week
because I haven't been sprinting twice a
week like I Norm my normal regimen is I
lift heavy four times a week I on the
other days I do about four days of Bas
training Zone too two of those days I
Sprint I always eat a lot of protein
that is my
lifestyle and my blood sugar is 85 when
I do that and I'm a midlife woman and
you know the metabolic things that
happen to midlife women even backing off
a little bit starts to creep up my blood
sugar so this is a constant daily
habitual lifestyle that we all need to
lead and so when I see that and someone
as healthy as me when my patients show
up and they casually been told that they
have something that's going to kill them
I don't think that's enough attention
that's what I've been thinking a lot
about recently is what diet is going to
lead me to better cognitive performance
to someone that spends a lot of my time
talking yes but then also I'm on stage
I'm in boardrooms and in meetings and in
negotiations I'm reading emails and
writing books Etc so I'm always thinking
if I can just get 5% Edge well I can
tell you for instance the the dietitians
and chefs that make the food for the pro
athletes that I've taken care of across
my life they're not only eating meat
they have a very well-balanced diet that
includes lots of vegetables lots of high
protein they they take amino acid
supplements if they need to fill in the
gaps right if they're not getting enough
Lucine or something but they just don't
go down one one pathway I haven't seen
that in the Pros that I take care of he
to has given me a very sharp mind has it
an extremely sharp mind it's so
interesting as a podcast when you sit
here and you have all these
conversations because some days you show
up and sometimes these conversations
last for four hours and your brain and
mouth just don't feel like they're
connected yeah and then on other days I
come here like boom boom and it's
automatic yeah it's like I don't have to
think and it's just flowing off off my
mouth and the variance the big I said so
the causal factors are obviously sleep
is one of them the other one is how many
carbohydrates I've had in recent yes
hours so if I've had a lot of carboh
hydrates something you know like if I've
had bread my mouth and my brain have no
connection if I've had lots of sugar my
mouth in my brain are completely done
agreed agreed you know because of this
CGM thing I found that if I only eat
protein for breakfast which uh egg white
omelette or you know whatever just
protein that I needed a little complex
carbs in order
for about 10:00 in the morning to be
able to function at a high level with my
patients so now I've added 50 gr of
carbs in the morning but that's not a
lot of carbs not very much I just needed
that little complex but uh interesting
right and what do you eat I eat 130
grams of protein a day there's no upper
limit on how much protein you can eat in
a single setting I try to get at least
30 because there is a lower thresholds
for 30 and so if I do that uh it takes
three meals and a couple SN a day I
that's a lot of volume of food so I try
to eat really dense so uh a cup of Greek
yogurt is like 18 grams and a really
pure beef stick is another 16 so at this
time I at this point I've
memorized the most dense foods that I
can to get that much protein it's a lot
of protein it's a gram per pound it's a
gram per pound and that's what I need to
build muscle Studies have shown that uh
eating high protein Al without lifting
as much as I want myself and others to
do will help maintain muscle and then I
eat a lot of vegetables I don't now I
hope people are not going to throw them
at me but I don't eat fruit except
blueberries fruit is Nature's dessert so
if we're going to eat fruit eat it as
dessert I eat I eat blueberries with my
yogurt but um and then carbs I only eat
complex carbs if I eat them at
all quick one I want to talk about
something we all need to take seriously
which is cyber security whether you're a
first-time founder facing your very
first audit or a seasoned professional
who's been through it all staying
compliant is getting more critical than
ever and more complicated I have to say
and that is where vant comes in who is a
sponsor of this podcast vant takes the
pain out of security compliance
automating the tedious but essential
process of proving your business is
secure across over 35 Frameworks like
sock 2 ISO
271 centralize your workflows answer
security questions up to 5 times faster
and protect your business without losing
focus on growth and this is really a
critical part of this a new IDC white
paper found that companies using van
save over
$535,000 a year and it pays for itself
in just 3 months for a limited time my
community gets $1,000 off vter at
v.com that's
van.com for $1,000
off you're um a very big advocate of
muscle you know when we talk about
longevity something that you continually
come back to as the most important thing
for people's longevity I think I would
put muscle and bone near the same
category because you can have all the
muscle you want but if you break your
hip you still have the downstream
effects now you're much Les less likely
to break your hip if you're strong but I
think muscle or bone are really
important what if
you 65 years old 70 years old and you
haven't got MH strong muscles right now
now your muscles have um declined let's
say over the last couple of decades is
it too late never it's never too late it
is never too late your body will always
rise to the Strategic stress you place
on it so there are a lot of and growing
number of what used to be anomalies all
over the Internet of people in their 60s
7s 80s and Beyond in a gym powerlifting
becoming uh competitive bodybuilders so
even if you're starting
not being able to get up out of a chair
over a very short amount of time 6
months a year you can reverse the
trajectory of your Frailty but it takes
consistency right I do wonder that I
think about think about my father and
he's approaching his 70s now and I don't
think he's done weight training for the
last 15 15 years yeah and there is a
part of me that did wonder is it too
late now to to start doing weight
training because it's almost like a a
two-sided problem in the fact that you
haven't done it yes so you find it
harder so you don't do it so you find it
harder and then you sort of spiral down
to this sedentary State well and you
know what you do for that is nobody
expects you to start with powerlifting
squats deadlifts nobody expects that
moving our body through a range of
motion doing body weight progressing to
free weights progressing to like kettle
bells progressing to bands when once you
see that your body is capable of
adapting and
progressing you will get there pretty
rapidly I used to do this program called
a start where I would take people fresh
off the couch and over three months we
would get them to a 5K race because 5K
is a meaningful distance for people who
are sedentary and over that course of 3
months we did a series of um body weight
and kettle bell type exercises in a Circ
followed by walking and people started
with 51% body fat not being able to get
through the warmup not be able to hold
himself up in a plank and in three
months they could plank for 2 minutes
they could walk for three miles they
could keep going for the entire
10-minute circuit without having to stop
so there is never an age or skill level
when our body will not respond to the
Strategic stress you put on it so uh get
a trainer for your dad if he'd accept it
if he would accept it I'll call him
after this if I am trying to build
muscle are there a certain amount
of days of the week or repetitions I
need to do to build the muscle I think
about this a lot when I'm out here in La
I'm I'm I'm trying to make sure that I
don't lose my muscle but I spend a lot
of time sat down in here recording
podcasts so is there a certain amount of
times I need to work out that muscle
before I lose it you know I was just
reading this morning actually that um
even with a 10 week Hiatus from let's
say you're lifting consistently even
with a 10we Hiatus uh you will retain
muscle memory so that you don't make
serious declines which is little relief
to me because it's been a little while
with this book so you retain muscle
memory and you can quickly once you get
started again get back up to the place
you were um so all is not lost if you
take a few days off
but the minimum if we're really working
at it is a couple days a week
progressively lifting harder for men in
midlife it's about eight reps four sets
for women once we've trained to the
place we can lifting heavy four reps
four sets and when I say that out loud I
get a lot of comments about somebody's
going to get hurt well it's true but you
have to work your way up to that like
any sport you have to work your way
towards that level because what we're
trying to do by lifting heavier
especially for women is replace the
anabolic stimulus that estrogen
was you must work hard enough estrogen
creates growth we must signal our body
by the intensity of our work to build
muscle and lifting heavy does that so if
you're starting on the
couch uh start with bands start with
light weights start with the Mambi pami
pink weights that I rail against but
don't stay there continue to work your
way up in a progressive way to heavy
lifting total body at least twice a week
to maintain
do I need to increase the weight load to
build muscle because I wonder when I go
to the gym sometimes you know I might be
using smaller dumbbells but I'm doing
more repetitions yeah is that still
going to build muscle well it depends
what you want so so lighter weights
higher reps is uh
will will uh function for hypertrophy
for big bigger total muscle but not
necessarily power and strength in Lo in
midlife and Beyond I am Lifting for
longevity EMP power so I'm not as
interested as I once was in the bigness
of my muscle I'm interested in can it
move powerfully over times can I get up
off the floor can I lift my suitcase
above my head so Lifting for power is
lower reps higher weights so it just
depends what our goal is you may be
focused on hypertrophy right now which
is fine because you've not reach the
critical decade so if I'm looking for
hypertrophy yeah higher reps lower
weights so 12 12 15 reps low weight and
then if I was looking for power then
maybe 6 eight 6 eight that's right how
many do you do I do four you do four mhm
so big weight four big weights four reps
four sets interesting I didn't know that
M interesting
and just to give some sort of
foundational knowledge as to why muscle
is so important because some people
still might not um be aware of the link
between longevity and muscle a lot of
this is to do with from what I
understand glucose so it has to do with
muscle as the snc for
glucose uh it is a key factor in
preventing insulin resistance not to
mention strength staying upright not
falling down causing a fracture right so
muscle is a metabolic endrocrine organ
it releases when it
releases um you know one of the things
that releases is skeletal muscle
contraction by curls causes the
transcription of a protein called clo
which is the longevity protein about 30
years ago it was described in nature it
is the protein when muscle contracts
that's transcribed it works on every
organ we know that it's critical for the
longevity and repair of organs because
mice who are born without the ability to
make
clo die
old very young chronologically they're
very young mice but they die very old
mice because they have not enjoyed this
protein clo we make clo by the
contraction of skeletal muscle here's a
study I did uh years ago that showed
that I measured clo level circulating in
the blood of older Masters athletes
people 60 70 80 younger Master's
athletes 40 and sedentary people and
what I found that the highest levels of
circulating cloo the longevity pro
protein
we're in young athletes not surprising
the second highest level of longevity
protein clo were in Old Masters athletes
70 80 the lowest level of longevity
protein were in young sedentary people
so even old athletes had more
circulating
cloo than young sedentary people so just
the contraction of skeletal muscle can
add to your longevity through this
protein another Protein that's released
with skeletal muscle contraction called
ginin it is transcribed goes to the
brain works at a place called the
nucleus culus which is critical for
resilience it makes you more resilient
it helps you able to problem solve and
then you know a very popular uh protein
that is transcribed with skeletal muscle
contraction is called irisin it's the
exercise protein which you know it works
on bone it works on fat to Brown fat
from white fat to Brown fat which is has
higher thermogenesis it has higher
mitochondrial load it so muscle just in
doing its thing not just looking pretty
in a gym mirror does all these metabolic
functions and so that's why we think it
has such a key role in longevity so if
I'm trying to protect my muscle as I age
are there any supplements that I should
be taking
I mean do they sell cloo supplements
they don't you have to make it oh F
contract your own muscles well uh you
need to feed your
muscles I always quote people one gram
per ideal pound because listen I I I'm
an actual practicing person doctor and
here's what I know people need really
Specific Instructions and they can't be
confusing
so is there a range of protein people
need yes there is but people can
remember one gram per ideal pound so you
got to feed your muscle with protein
high quality protein the highest quality
protein has the greatest percentage of
an an essential amino acid called Lucine
Lucine is not made by the body it has to
be taken in from the outside it's a
branch train amino acid and you get it
from whey protein the best source in the
universe of Lucine and whey protein is
mother's milk but most of us don't drink
that as adults so we get it from dairy
products
you can get it from plants for everybody
that is a plant lover you just have a
much lower percentage you have to eat a
lot more of it so high quality protein
number one number two there's a lot of
research uh for uh creatine
supplementation for both men and women
when I first started being aware of
creatine in 1992 it was during the
Olympics I was working with a bunch of
wrestlers at that time um we would give
very very high doses we would cycle the
creatine we would come on and off now
steadily five uh grams a day will help
build muscle it will help build brain
it's really interesting a couple of uh
months ago I asked the people in my
office if they used creatine yeah and a
couple of the guys put their hands up
none of the women put their hands up huh
and I asked them why I said why didn't
use creatine they said that they thought
it was for
bodybuilders well it started out for
bodybuilders but it's for everyone
actually it's very well studied so I
actually had this um debate with my
girlfriend last year at Christmas time
um because I was taking creatine and
asked if she wanted some and she made
the same comment to me that it was for
bodybuilders and I she put on weight if
she had it and then I said no that's not
true so she Googled it and she saw that
it's good for like cognitive performance
skin hair muscle bone etc etc and now
she takes it every day perfect I think
there's a big um re-education piece to
be done there because we us we almost
used to think of it like uh a steroid or
something and it's not at
all you know what despite podcasts like
this and despite me screaming from every
Mountaintop I find that there still is a
an incredible knowledge deficit in the
general public about the principles of
how to be the healthiest we can be and
an even bigger Gap in the ability to
take action for ourselves I mean and
it's not a judgment it's simply an
observation that we know what to do but
we don't do it and we know what to do
and we don't do it even if we see in our
family someone who's going through the
throws of diabetes or even on the
Alzheimer's it's still not enough
motivation and I think that's the real
problem to solve motivation how'd you
solve
that sometimes sometimes we solve it by
scarce right you know someone has a
tremendous health problem but sometimes
that's not even
enough I have found that it is never
going to be motivating enough to try to
say okay if you do this today in 20
years you're going to be much better
there's this temporal disconnect people
just don't get it what they're going to
be like at 70 I think we have to make
you feel good every single day it's like
when we were talking about your brain
when you're doing heavy work and
cognitive work if you can feel better
every single day you'll continue the
behavior not for a promise so I think
that is the that is the
way to talk to anybody way I talked to
my patients can I make you feel better
tomorrow can I make you feel like a
badass cuz you lifted heavy weights
today um it's hard though with things
like bone you're telling someone that
they need to be getting I don't know
their calcium and stuff like that they
think well I can't see my bones and
osteoporosis is so far away that yeah
it's hard until you see someone fracture
or you fracture yourself I agree with
you vitamin D as well as crucial isn't
it for bone health I was reading that
there it is it is magnesium vitamin D
magnesium uh lesser known things
strontium zinc Boron and micronutrients
but big thing
vitamin D magnesium sleep sleep talked
about that a little bit as well how
important that was um you mentioned that
I'm running now yes you are thank you
for noticing you'd never mention it and
a million others are supposed to join
you I noticed yes we're going to try and
get a million people running that's
great you're going to save a lot of
lives oh thank you um but much of it
because of the work that people like you
do and that come on my show and inspire
me to think about things like my va2 Max
and I'd definitely been just weight
training for the last couple of years
not really thinking about my bones or my
V2 Max so this has been quite a big
shift for me yeah but when I think about
running I definitely hated it I still
hate it a little bit but I I hate and
love it now which is
progress what are the things I should be
thinking about CU people talk to me
about Runners knees and stuff like that
and I don't want to get injured right
but I'm running quite a lot so I hear uh
from a lot of
Runners that oh okay I'm going to lift
with my arms because I'm running so that
means my legs are going to get stronger
well what I know from 30 years in
practice is that Runners who only run
are hurt a
lot and here's why running builds a big
cardiovascular
engine but it does not build muscle mass
below your belly generally unless you're
running uphill all the time and you're
building glutes
but so what happens running is a single
leg sport if you if you look at a gate
analysis you're on one
leg at a time you're never on two legs
and walking you're in two legs on
running you're in one leg so if this is
if my hands are on someone's pelvis when
we're running we can't be going like
this every single stride sort of
oscillating oscillating like we're
walking on a catwalk in Fashion Week we
want to be running like this straight
well that takes tremendous glute
strength butt string because it's the
glutes that balance the pelvis if we
were in my office and you came in with
pain as a runner I would stand you on
one leg to see even if in a controlled
POS uh environment you could do a single
leg Squat and keep your pelvis stable
without your knee falling in and if you
can't it just tells me that we have a
lot of butt core and hip strength to do
and my lower back something I think
about because when I train especially
I'm training for a football match at the
moment oh um in the UK and I always seem
to get a glute injury so I and it's all
it's almost like 100% predictable that
if I don't stretch properly even even if
I stretch a little bit but don't stretch
fully yeah when I run on that football
pitch within five minutes I feel like a
little it's almost like a little tear in
my glute yeah almost yeah what am I
doing what do you think is happening it
might be useful to you as you're
training to have a motion analysis to
have someone stand you on one leg and
look at the way that that one motion
pattern is different from the other
because if it's predictable like that M
there's an imbalance in you and so it
can likely be trained I mean I can give
you an example in my life if you want to
see how that works so when I run and
when I increase my my speed and
distances I predictably predictably get
left Achilles
tendinitis and I get right hip flexor
sharp stabbing
pain predictably that is
because my left big toe from wearing
high heels all my life has arthritis so
when I run I don't run through the
center of my foot I run through the side
of my foot where your pinky is where my
pinky is so instead of running through
like this I run through like this puts
extra stress on my achilles tendon
changes my gate enough that it's tight
all up through the left side of my body
and my right um hip flexor is taking the
brunt of that that is a motion pattern
deficit that I know I have so if you
were predictably getting the same injury
all the single time it's probably due to
Something's too tight on one side
something's too weak on the other side
and if you get it evaluated you could
probably train it out of you you have
athletes and people that come you stand
on one leg to test something yeah what
is that do you want to see it yes yeah
let's do it
so to test whether we have muscle
imbalances that could cause injuries
when we run because I had said Runners
are very hurt athletes that I take care
of this is called the Trendelenburg sign
and it tells us whether your glute your
butt muscles are strong enough to keep
your pelvis straight and whether you're
strong enough to keep your knee from
falling into this position okay which is
called vagus so collect yourself we're
going to stand all stacked up on our
left knee my left knee yeah oh gosh yep
and then we're going to do some single
leg squats without falling
over so what happens is people drop
their hip and their knee Falls like this
it goes blop yeah a thousand steps a
mile so you can imagine if your knee's
like this a thousand steps a mile your
little kneecaps getting pulled off and
we can't balance we're getting our
balance a thousand steps of Mile so we
can train this let's do the other leg
engage sit single leg squat you look
like I'm drunk or something yep there
you go now you're
compensating but the goal in the mirror
is not to have the hip drop and not to
have the knee fall in I feel like this
one's way stronger and that's why it was
easier it it looks that way so that
means this glute this rear end glute is
stronger than that one that's the one
that always gets injured my left one yep
because it's not functioning as well and
it leaves this side unprotected so what
have I got to do so uh double leg squats
are good but single leg step UPS single
leg lunges as in like so if we had a
step we would be holding a we could
start with no weights like
this and you're tall you could start low
you could go up here I usually usually
use an 18 and then when you feel
comfortable and your hips not bouncing
up and down take your your we weight
your barbell and step up and step down
okay yep y right cuz it's Single Leg so
I'd have my weight and I'd be going like
this MH and then I step down step down
with the same
foot and what am I what am I doing here
I'm I I'm just you're strengthening one
side at a time okay because if you step
up if it and you're wobbly M then that's
what's happening when you're running
okay and so you can do step Downs too I
mean you can come this way and then come
like this okay yeah and then we do uh
there are lots of things like this a
good physio but if we're up here we can
do things like um hip hitches where you
put your leg down I am in heels today
but we go down like
this without going down like this yep
okay thank you so much let's get the
table back
in your gut and my gut is the home of
our digestion and it's also a gateway to
Better Health but it can be hard to know
what's going on in there Zoe who
sponsors this podcast has one of the
largest microbiome databases on the
planet and one of the world's most
advanced at home gut health tests their
blood sugar sensor which I have in this
box in front of me goes on your arm so
you can see how different foods impact
your blood sugar then there's the at
home blood sample which is really easy
and analyzes your body's blood fat and
of course the
famous blue Zoey cookie which tests your
metabolism oh and I can't forget there's
also a poo sample which is a critical
step in understanding the health of your
microbiome and you post it to Zoe and
you get your results back which will
help you to understand your body's
response to different foods using your
results Zoe's app will also create a
personalized nutrition plan for you and
this is exactly why I invested in the
business so my question to you is how
healthy is your gut head to zoe.com to
audio your kit and find out and because
you're one of our listeners use code
Steven 10 for 10% off your membership
head to zoe.com
now I've invested more than a million
pounds into this company Perfect Ted and
they're also a sponsor of this podcast I
switch over to using matcha as my
dominant energy source and that's where
perfect headed comes in they have the
matcha powders they have the matcha
drinks they have the pods and all of
this keeps me focused throughout a very
very long recording day no matter what's
going on and their team is obsessed with
quality which is why they Source their
ceremonial grade matcha from Japan so
when people say to me that they don't
like the taste of matcha I'm guessing
that they haven't tried perfect head
unlike low quality matcha that has a
bitter grassy taste perfect Ted is
smooth and naturally sweet and without
knowing it you you're probably a perfect
head customer already if you're getting
your match at places like blank Street
or Joe and the juice but now you can
make it yourself at home so give it a
try and we'll see if you still don't
like matcher so here's what I'm going to
do I'm going to give you 40% off our
matcher if you try it today head to
perfect ted.com and use code
steven4 or if you're in a supermarket
you can get it at tesos or Holland and
Barett or in the Netherlands at Albert
Hine and those of you in the US you can
get it on
Amazon on the subject of OB it and
weight we talked last time really
fascinating thing that you said to me
which stayed with me is that the more
weight we're carrying the more harm it's
doing to our bones in a really
disproportionate way could you clarify
that again but also talk to me about
give me the case for keeping my body fat
down as I age so what we were talking
about is uh joint health yeah and the
fact that every bone if in your knee for
instance if your Fe if this is your
femur the end of every bone has a bumper
of cartilage cartilage is a matrix of
collagen fibers that has cells in it and
its entire job is to shock absorb so the
bones don't do so much of this bones are
pretty fragile but they Glide cartilage
has a in physics a coefficient of
friction that is less than ice so it's
smoother than ice it Glides right if
it's
perfect cartilage is very subject to the
forces of weight such that in our
Laboratories when we were doing
cartilage research and wanted to damage
cartilage all we had to do is drop a
marble on it so it doesn't take much so
if we're carrying around a lot of heavy
extra weight and we don't have the
muscles to support that instead of
muscles actually like a shock absorber
and protecting our cartilage we're
banging more now remember banging is
good for bones it's not good for
cartilage so we want to make sure that
we have a healthy weight so that we're
not exerting so much load because it's 7
to n we talked about last time 7 to n
times uh body weight pressure across the
joints and so that's why we want to
compose our body and have a body
composition not a weight a body
composition of of more muscle than at
aost tissue yeah this kind of goes back
to what we were saying earlier because
you can say these things but still
changes still far away from many many
people and I was just wondering in the
people that you've seen make radical
changes that you've worked with are
there key things that happen we talked a
little bit about someone hits Rock
Bottom they get a bad diagnosis they're
forced but is there is there anything
else that one can do to will themselves
to change to keeping a journal some kind
of exercise I think it's really helpful
to know as much about yourself as
possible so if I'm intaking someone into
a program we're going to build I don't I
weigh them but what's most important is
I do a body composition so that we can
go through step by step and say in your
current body you have I'm making these
numbers up 32% body fat you have very
little lean muscle so even though you
may be okay with the way you look in a
mirror you're skinny fat meaning you
have two little muscle and too much
adapost tissue and and we just and we
talk about all the things we've talked
about about why we need to build more
muscle but when you see those numbers
numbers don't lie nor are they judgments
but if you're just looking in the mirror
you may say oh that's okay or you may
hate the little belly roll but it's not
you don't hate it enough but when you
see that you have very little muscle
mass and a very high percentage of fat
those data alone are sometimes a
motivation and then if we know that
we're going to redo that test in three
months or six months and track changes
over time that can be an added motivator
besides tragedy data can be a motivator
wanting to feel like yourself again in
in women in midlife someone sometimes
just say I just want to feel like myself
again well we're different people after
our estrogen goes away and so it takes a
different kind of work to feel like
ourselves again but at the end of the
day so tools wise I think journals are
are helpful tracking uh keeping a record
of how you felt on a day what you did
that day cgms and stuff as well anything
that turns the lights on has been really
that's right data cgms are you you know
I learned what I was going to learn at 3
months but I've had it on for 18 months
just cuz that data Spurs me on like oh I
that was a really stressful o day my
sugar spiked up even though I wasn't
eating I must have been very high
cortisol I'm releasing so much from my
liver it's just informs me about the
inner workings of my body but also at
the end of the day you have to love
yourself enough Stephen and I can't make
you love yourself and I can't a number
of harassments in my office cannot make
make you value yourself enough to invest
in yourself daily and at the end of the
day that's what it's going to
take I've talked quite extensively on
this podcast about menopause it's really
fascinating to me I think in part
because I didn't even know what it was
yes even it a couple of years ago
probably a year and a half ago I had no
idea what it was what are some of the
pervasive myths about menopause that
people still need to sort of get
past despite everyone talking about it
despite you having lots of ation about
it I still find a lot of people who have
never heard of Perry
menopause which is the decade leading up
to the day of menopause which is 365
days after your last men menstrual cycle
on average in this country it's about
51 people have not heard of per
menopause they've never heard of hormone
replacement therapy and they don't know
what to do about it and they're ashamed
to talk about it because
somehow needing things in this country
if you're a
woman have gone unnoticed for instance
like oh I'm just going to suffer through
my mom never talked about it so I think
the myth that you have to suffer is a
myth there is more known now than
there's ever been about how using
lifestyle to feel better I always
encourage women to make their hormone
replacement decision based on science
and not fear and to make it early
how I I encourage my patients even in
the mid 40s to read the books watch the
podcasts identify a clinician so when
it's time for them to make their
decision they've got
everything um lined
up and you can take hormones while
you're still menstruating and there's no
reason not to in fact that's what birth
control is birth control is is 10 times
the dose of hormone replacement therapy
so
under careful supervision you can make
your decision very early what I want
people to do uh is educate themselves I
call it menopause literacy because we
have a very low level of menopause
literacy in this
country I want them to make their
hormone replacement decision
meaning am I going to go on them where
am I going to get them can I find a
clinician to help me number three I
would like them to as we talk talked
about
earlier build their unbreakable
lifestyle develop the habits early not
when they're in the throws of menopause
and feeling desperate but early of
lifting weights of cardio that includes
base training and Sprint intervals
anti-inflammatory nutrition early so
that it's just the way you live so that
when you're feeling so bad you're not
trying to learn all these things at
once and there is a significant link
between menopause and bone density
because you lose some of those critical
hormones like testosterone like estrogen
and testosterone so estrogen on
Bones acts to control the cell that
breaks down bones we talked about in
bone health there's a cell that breaks
down Bones called the osteoclast with a
c and a cell that builds bones with
called an
osteoblast estrogen helps control the
osteoclast so even in menopause when
there is no estrogen we're still
building bone but breaking down bone out
strips building bone so replacing
hormones helps rebalance bone breakdown
and Bone
rebuilding and if we lose our estrogen
around the time of this per menopause
menopause we can lose
15% of our bone density and if we don't
catch it because insurance only pays for
dexas scans when we're 6 5 Which is far
too late in my opinion we're behind the
eightball so I encourage everyone once
they start going through par menopause
to get a dexa scan whether they have to
pay for it at their gym save up their
coffee money it's worth knowing your
bone status what are some of the most um
obvious but pertinent muscular skeletal
syndromes of menopause I'm glad you
asked that in July my group and I
created a
nomenclature called the muscular
skeletal syndrome of menopause because
women were showing up in my
office saying things without prompting
because I I'm a doctor who listens I sit
down on a stool we have a conversation I
do not chart in front of you so
people talk to me and out of nowhere
women would say to me Doc I feel like
I'm falling
apart and I don't know what's going on
but I feel like I'm going crazy because
I've been told nothing's wrong with me
and I started noticing that more and
more as women started coming
in with their shoulders not moving which
is an entity called frozen shoulder and
so as I
started looking at this pattern and
reading the very few studies that were
done we've known for 30 years that the
incidence of arthritis inflammatory
arthritis in women after 50 is much
higher than inflammatory arthritis in
men we've known it for 30 years and as I
started researching remember how I said
earlier that every muscular skeletal
tissue is derived out of the same type
of stem cell the mesenchimal stem
cell all of those tissues muscle bone
tendon ligament
fat muscle Drive stem cells are all
sensitive to estrogen and without it
several things happen there's something
called arthralgia which is total body
pain meaning your body hurts so much
that you can't even get out of bed that
was one of the biggest things I had I'm
an athlete and I could barely get out of
bed because I was so
inflamed due to the lack of estrogen
estrogen is a huge anti-inflammatory
agent so I was totally inflamed my body
hurt that's called arthralgia women come
in and I'm not kidding they come in they
say my arm won't move literally it won't
move or I can't hook my bra that is due
to the inflammation of losing estrogen
in Asian cultures it's called the
50-year-old woman's shoulder because it
happens to 50-year old women it is a
sign of the inflammation of losing
estrogen we know about sarcopenia the
loss of lean muscle mass about 20% when
you lose your estrogen we've talked
about loss of bone density we have
increased incidence of tendon and
ligament problems Achilles tendon tennis
elbow patellar tendon because the
collagen fibers of Tenon and ligament
have estrogen receptors on them and so
everything starts to work less well
without the presence of estrogen so I
saw all of those things and we gathered
the world's data which isn't a lot a lot
more research needs to be done and we
gave it a nomenclature we called it and
published it as the muscul skeletal
syndrome of menac cause because I tell
you for sure Stephen if someone goes
into their doctor's office which in this
country is so restricted in the time
that we can spend and says I have this
and this and this and this and this six
things in 15 minutes it is difficult to
get through that but if someone comes
with a nomenclature of I think I have
the musculoskeletal syndrome of
menopause my arm doesn't move blah blah
blah immediately you don't have to go
through a differential diagnosis of 600
things you're like oh as a
doctor this paper on the
musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause
has currently been downloaded almost
300,000 times and to put that in
context some of the biggest journals in
the world medical journals in the world
documented they did a a survey of how
many times their best articles had been
downloaded the best scientific journals
their articles are downloaded about
10,000 times this muscular scal syndrome
of menopause has been downloaded nearly
300,000 and it's not because yes it's a
good paper the need is so great Stephen
to communicate what the heck is going on
with people that I made it open access
meaning you don't have to pay to get
this article and I encourage people to
Google it it'll come up number one to
print it to read it to give it to your
doctors so that they can understand that
you're highly inflamed that's why your
total body hurts that your shoulder
doesn't move because you're inflamed
that your knee hurts because you have
the arthritis of menopause and just to
build the understanding of what is
actually going on with people
fascinating I didn't mean 300,000
downloads I know it's amazing it's like
a New York Times bestseller bestseller
research paper 30,000 p over or
something crazy crazy yeah
congratulations well you know what
research is a team effort and and we all
work together but thank you it's needed
used a word there arthritis which we've
not talked about yet but but used it to
describe your big toe as well yes I did
what is causing arthritis I don't want
to get arthritis oh who does there are
there are two kinds of arthritis there's
an autoimmune meaning your body is
identifying yourself as not yourself and
that's called rheumatoid arthritis that
is very different than the way I used it
today which is osteoarthritis which is
wear and tear arthritis okay so wear and
te arthritis can happen through
thousands and thousands of repetition uh
on a joint uh we were talking earlier
about running it's a thousand steps a
mile it can happen due to trauma I have
a lot of I used to take care of the
University of Pittsburgh football team
and I had a lot of 20-year-olds with
knee arthritis because the impact was so
great as linemen hit each other that
they would wear out their cartilage so
wear in ter arthritis
osteoarthritis is loss of the cartilage
layer on the end of bone it causes
aching pain it causes swelling it causes
stiffness uh and then to the degree that
you have it we can treat you
conservatively through a variety of
ways or at the end of the road we can
replace your joints I want to just
circle back on we were talking there
about the collection of symptoms that
are associated with menopause and you
were talking about how arthritis is a is
a factor are you telling me that to
avoid the muscular skeletal symptoms of
menopause
I should be taking hormone replacement
therapy here's what I'm telling you I'm
telling you that
every musculoskeletal tissue has Alpha
and beta estrogen receptors we know that
when those sit empty you will manifest
some of the muscular skeletal syndrome
of menopause 80% of us
do what I'm telling you is
that estrogen sitting in those receptors
can prevent bone loss can prevent muscle
loss can decrease the inflammation of
arthralgia and frozen shoulder so
everyone gets to make their own
decision people are thinking beings they
have agency they get to make that
decision to get out of pain and to
prevent the musculoskeletal syndrome of
menopause based on science and not
fear one of the um one of the things I'm
a little bit concerned about these days
is back pain yeah lower back pain in
particular um I read that lower back
pain is the single leading cause of
disability globally significantly
affecting individual's quality of life
and productivity which was published on
the World Health Organization yeah
article in 2020 lower back pain affected
69 million people globally and its
prevalence is increasing due to a number
of different factors one being aging but
also I just think generally how we're
living more sedentary lives and sitting
on these chairs and stuff like that mhm
back pain yeah common thing only seems
to exist in the Western World I had
someone come here from the who studied
the hadza tribe in Africa and they don't
have back pain there yeah how do they
live not like this right they squat yes
they don't have chairs
yes well back pain is endemic in our
population due to our lifestyle we're
sitting here for several hours I'm
probably sitting like this all hunched
over at some points our our cores are
relaxed we're not our our front cores
are relaxed relaxed our our lower back
is relaxed there's no stimulus to keep
our core strong sitting in a chair and
we do this 10 hours a day at least
right that's number one number two then
70% of people do no meaningful exercise
any time of the week so we never rebuild
it so we get low back pain due to muscle
weakness and another reason we get low
back pain particularly in women or very
elderly men is compression of our
vertebrae compression fractures of our
spine that can be very painful it
presents as low back pain I want to
differentiate for people listening the
difference between low back pain and and
nerve impingement that needs surgery low
back pain is that aching in your low
back the
stiffness when you go to a doctor with
low back pain there should be telling
you how to get stronger sending you for
physical therapy to stop smoking if
you're smoking CU that poisons bones
right all the lifestyle
things if you have pain starting in your
back but shooting down your leg like
electricity down the back of your leg
like literally think about how lightning
would feel that is because a nerve is
being impinged as it comes out of your
spinal cord that is something that needs
to be examined and looked at but I just
want to differentiate that because a lot
of people um mistake the tube to and a
lot I think it was 80% of westerners
will experience lower back pain and it
got me thinking about standing desks and
things like that do you advise people to
use standing desks I do and walking
treadmills um because there's so much
work that we do during the days that
isn't deep work we're emptying out our
email we're returning some phone calls
we're doing the less heavy brain heavy
parts of our job all can be done
standing or I've encouraged uh groups of
people that I work with to hold their
meetings doing wall squats just don't
sit at the board table pull up a wall
everybody's squat better be a pretty
quick meeting because that that takes a
lot of strength but to build in that
kind of Mobility the only time we really
need to sit is when we're solving World
Peace yeah the rest of it we can stand
and in fact Studies have shown that if
we're trying to learn something it's
better to be moving as we learn because
the kinetic energy of learning is better
for our brain
for instance I used an
example uh yesterday actually when I I
was teaching people how to time manage
and I said when I'm listening to long
form podcasts like this I can't sit for
three hours but I can walk and listen
and I retain more for instance
so that that been proven that if we're
in exercise we retain more in terms of
studying oh okay you've done a lot of
studies they're so fascinating H have
you got a favorite the very first one we
did on Master's athletes answering the
question at what age do we really slow
down because if you believe
Hallmark and all the uh rest in peace
balloons that go around on your 40th or
50 birthday slowing down is an
inevitable part of aging but the fact of
the matter is and our study showed
that when I looked at track and field
ath in every race from 100 m to 10,000 M
and I looked at the top eight finishes
in every age group in every race that we
do not significantly slow down until
we're past
70 so between 50 and
70 the guy who won the one mile race
finished it in four minutes and 34
seconds the same year of the study the
kid that won the high school mile race
did it in four minutes and 17 seconds
the 70 70-year-old who won the one mile
race did it in a little less than 7
minutes it just shows you that if we're
slowing down dramatically before our 70s
we've either decided not to train so
hard we're just not trying anymore we've
been terribly injured right and we can't
but it's not because of biology because
of psychology exactly no light bulb goes
off we think though we think that when
we experience that first twinge that
first pain we start to get a little bit
tied we think it's natural so we kind of
relent to it we just give in and then
that's that slow spiral downwards into a
lifestyle which becomes self-fulfilling
I guess we stop trying hard we stop
playing hard because we stop trying hard
because we think it's inevitable we
think no aging is inevitable how we age
is is up to us you're working on a book
aren't you you've just handed in the
manuscript for we're very very excited
about this book unbreakable unbreakable
go strong live long age with power and
it really picks up the conversation of
aging and Longevity that I've been
talking about for a long time but really
focuses on the longevity of
women so the book is framed around the
pillars of Aging which I call time bombs
the time bomb of metabolic dysfunction
uh the time bomb that we think means our
DNA as our destiny which it is not we
can modify ourselves and several others
and really explain the science of what's
going on and that aging is not an
inevitable decline from Vitality to
Frailty unless we cop to that attitude
right and then the second part of the
book lays out a lifestyle that I call
unbreakable it's about muscle it's a
bone it's about nutrition but the most a
very important part is what you just
said it's about attitude and mindset and
so I help
people set standards and goals for for
what they want based on their values if
I didn't Value Independence if I didn't
value having my brain till the very end
and all the other things that I
value then my goals would be uninformed
I could say oh I want to run a marathon
at 80 but that's not enough unless it's
connected to my values and then further
along we talk about building resilience
because brain resilience can be built in
the same way that skeletal resilience
can and I believe it takes both both of
those things to progress and to age with
power and then the final sections of
this book really take us to the next
level how do we now that we've optimized
our health and decided that we are not
the
victims of time I don't believe that I
believe we
can shape our future how what do we do
for Peak Performance how do we continue
to squeeze performance out and what are
the cool techniqu technologies that can
help us I'm very very excited yay can we
pre-order it yet uh not yet but you can
get on my wait list on my website okay
I'll link that below for anyone that's
Keen to get that book I I'll be on that
list as well I'll give you one is there
anything else that we should have talked
about that we haven't Dr
vunda last week I was uh speaking at the
American Diabetes Association and
talking about midlife and menopause
which you and I have talked about and
all the metabolic changes that go on
when estrogen walks out the door and
we've already talked today about
pre-diabetes and how we need to put on a
big alarm because of all the metabolic
changes that will lead to diabetes and
Alzheimer's but when I look at those two
things separately per menopause and all
the metabolic changes and the lipid
changes and the fat distribution and the
insulin insensitivity and pre-diabetes
they are nearly identical and what we
know is that this is another alarm to
sound if we have not paid attention in
the critical decade of our lives and
become pre-diabetic and then are a woman
and lose our estrogen it compounds the
normal metabolic changes that happen
with insulin resistance to the loss of
estrogen and after menopause women have
more diabetes and therefore more
Alzheimer's and so if I can back all
this up and start people thinking about
it when we're 35 that is work worth
doing that's exactly what you're doing
it's exactly what you're doing I think
you know the reason I'm so compelled by
menopause as well a secondary reason is
because I have so many wonderful women
in my life incl including my partner who
yeah might not be as fortunate to be
exposed to all the information that I
get exposed to by doing this so many of
the questions I'm asking you almost pre-
preparing me to be a supporting act in
her in her life she's what 32 now so you
know critical critical years you know
what Stephen if I could get more men to
take the attitude that you've just
expressed to have the Curiosity it to
learn about the changes in midlife women
and not only bodily changes but but
attitudinal and the sexuality changes I
think we could save a lot of marriages
but I find that there is for the lack of
knowledge there is amongst the women
there is even less knowledge among the
men but if it's a partnership so I think
your attitude and curiosity is is
laudable because I think we could save a
lot of relationships if everyone felt
that way yeah cuz if for me it has
created a ton of empathy MH and with
empathy you approach challenges
differently with a different perspective
yeah and there's less blame and there's
more yeah I think supporting um
encouragement so that's really why I
think it's important as well for men to
understand these things
because when you start noticing
differences maybe in someone in way she
she's feeling or your mother or yeah
grandmother or even your
daughters you might not be some of those
you know naive doctors who think
someone's losing their mind or that
they're just being different or it's
their personality and you might
understand that there's something deeper
going on um and also something that's at
least in part you can do something about
absolutely which I think is the most
important conclusive point we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest with not knowing who they're
leaving it for and the question left for
you is how do you know when is
enough I think how you know when it's
enough when it becomes if it pertains to
work or striving for something or is
when you don't love it anymore when it
becomes a grind and you don't love
it that's when it's enough because it's
not feeding
you
amen Dr Vite thank you so much for the
work that you do um you're such a star
and I think everybody should go follow
you on Instagram because you built an
incredible community over on Instagram
where you give away so much of this
knowledge absolutely free of charge but
I also think everybody should go to your
website thank you they should buy this
book I know this book is um maybe they
should just get on the wait list for the
upcoming book as well unbreakable
unbreakable um and they can get on that
weight list on your website right now
yes they can join your Instagram
Community which I think is phenomenal
it's so wonderful to see yeah um how
because you know usually people have a
following but I really feel like you
have a community yes I see it in the
comment sections I see that people are
really really engaged and there as you
saw from the amount of people that
downloaded that paper that you published
there's a real thirst and hunger for
this information and I get so many
messages when from the last conversation
we had yeah but from these conversations
generally about from women from their
husbands who are so thankful for you oh
like so thankful it's you know because I
have lots of conversations about lots of
things but this particular conversation
provokes a certain type of energy that
is very atypical oh you know what I mean
you understand it because you feel it
every day but I really feel it as well
so thank you for doing the work that you
do and for turning the lights on for so
many people that are living in the
darkness as it relates to information
and that information is no doubt
undoubtedly saving many millions of
people's lives I hope so and that's work
worth we're doing so thank you so much
Dr vond thank you this has always blown
my mind a little bit 53% of you that
listen to the show regularly haven't yet
subscribed to the show so could I ask
you for a favor if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guests that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much some of the most successful
fascinating and insightful people in the
world have sat across from me at this
table and at the end of every
conversation I asked them to leave a
question behind in the famous Diary of a
CEO and it's a question designed to
spark the kind of ation that matter most
the kind of conversations that can
change your life we then take those
questions and we put them on these cards
on every single card you can see the
person who left the question the
question they asked and on the other
side if you scan that barcode you can
see who answered it next something I
know a lot of you have wanted to know
and the only way to find out is by
getting yourself some conversation cards
which you can play at home with friends
and family at work with colleagues and
also with total strangers on holiday
I'll put link to the conversation cards
in the description below and you can get
yours at the diary.com
[Music]